>> Anjana Vakil: We have really burdened
our brains with a lot of stuff.
Sure, we might have been doing very simple
little functions like push and pop and
map and reduce, but are they so simple?
No, we had a lot going on in there.
We had, we talked about pure functions and
how they are far and
away the idea behind
functional programming.
And we talked about the opposite of
the idea, which is side effects and
non deterministic, like depending on
other stuff outside of the function.
We talked about recursion as a way to
execute the same chunk of code over and
over and over again and
to operate in series of data, like arrays.
For example, so that we can do
the type of programming that we
are used to doing with iterative loops and
an imperative mindset.
And we made some cool art with it and
we also talked a lot about
higher order functions.
Functions that operate on other functions,
they either take in other functions or
they return other functions,
or both and we implemented our
good friends, map, reduce, filter.
We learned how we can use recursion for
pretty much anything we want
in functional programming.
We also talked about, okay,
if we don't have state,
we don't have values changing over time.
Or data that's mutating over time, how
do we remember information that we need?
Do we really need to have like, massive
function signatures with like 80,000
variables that take in all of the data
that we need to do a computation?
No, we can take advantage of closure and
split up that data into like
partial applications of functions.
And we can take advantage of composition
to then take those split up functions and
pipeline data through them so
that we get the transformations we want.
And then finally, we talked about how
dangerous mutation can be in terms
of having the rug pulled out from under
you and you think your data is one thing,
but your co-worker just
updated it to something else.
[LAUGH] Or worse yet, some magic in
the library you're using just did [LAUGH].
We talked about how to avoid that, A,
by making sure we avoid like
the plague any methods and
operations in JavaScript that
are inherently mutating.
And by asking ourselves,
how we would live without them.
And, or by working with tools
like immer or immutable JS,
persistent data that not only
helps us with efficient copies.
But also in the case of immer,
lets us pretend that we're pushing to
an array when we're actually
not messing with it.
So we have covered a lot
of ground together today.
I am very thankful to all of you for
grappling with all these things, and
I would love to know before we break.
What you feel are some takeaways from our,
[LAUGH] arguably very
brain hardy [LAUGH] to use
the technical term discussions today.
Are there certain ideas we've talked
about today that you feel like, okay,
I don't know about all that
other pipelines or whatever, but
I could really apply this idea to
my daily life as a programmer.
And think a little bit more
functionally about my programs.
Anybody have anything that they're gonna
try to kind of bring to their programming
this is subjective.
>> Speaker 2: I think it was very helpful
to see the extent of what you have to
do to utilize it in places
where it needs state.
Cuz most of the time when I learned
recursion, functional programming,
like concepts,
they were a lot more, mathematical.
And just kind of, just having all your
stay kind of in the top, most level
somewhere where it's all followed and
controlled is where you want to have
it when you're actually implementing
it in a higher order application.
>> Anjana Vakil: So sort of getting into
that idea of pushing the impurities away,
pushing the state to the outer edges, and
making sure that all of the operations
that we're doing are stateless.
Even if we do need some
state at some point,
making sure that sandbox in a way
where we can be certain the rest of
our program is not infected
by it like the zombie virus.
Awesome thank you for sharing.
>> Speaker 3: I'm still thinking about
performance implications especially when
it comes to recursion.
And that was helpful, at least in my mind,
to picture what's happening when
you tied it to the call stack.
And so now I'm wondering if
other more functionally designed
languages who are maybe not
single threaded like JavaScript,
if that would have a performance benefit?
>> Anjana Vakil: I mean, this is the thing
there's a lot of optimizations that can be
done on the language implementation
level that we as the programmers
who use the language don't
usually think about every day.
But that become very relevant once
you start thinking about like super
intense data applications.
And so, yes there are dedicated
languages that are good for this.
Or for example, immer is an example or
any immutable data structure library for
JavaScript is also a performance
related tool that we
can use clever implementations
of a lot of things like arrays.
Or what have you that handle a lot
of that performance bottlenecks for
us, and yes,
highly encourage folks to go try out.
Or at least look at some other languages
that are kind of more explicitly
designed for functional programming.
Rather than our good friend JavaScript
that was born in a lab in 10 days,
anyway [LAUGH].
And yeah, highly encourage you to
go deeper again I'll leave you
with a whole bunch of links
that you can dig into.
I wanna give a huge thank you to
all of you for dealing with these
hoops that I've been making you
jump through, not hoops [LAUGH].
And for asking these great questions and
sharing these gotchas and,
but what abouts and
that is the work, right?
We are doing the rubber meets the road
work of actually trying to apply
these ideas and not just sit back and
watch some academic talk about
category theory or whatever.
So amazing work and
I also wanna give a big shout out.
I would not be here teaching a workshop
on functional programming had I
not accidentally stumbled upon
functional programming in a community.
And again, I mentioned it earlier,
it's called the recurse center.
It's super cool so I'm not here to plug
it, but please go check out the website.
And huge thank you to everyone that I
met there that taught me all of these
things and
helped me bang my head against them.
And I hope you all can now go be that
person for your team or whatever.
Really appreciate you all,
stick in with it.
>> [APPLAUSE]